Documentation for ENG-37662 Dry-run Drift Detection (#103)
NSO-developer/nso-gitbook: operation-and-usage/operations/lifecycle-operations.md

This is a tailored `check-sync` intended to be used on multiple services. This action takes the same input parameters as `check-sync` service instance action.

There are 3 choices of service filter that can be used as input. 
* Use `service-type` to filter on services of a certain type. 
* Use `service-id` to filter on specific service instances. 
* Use `select-services` to filter on services evaluated by an XPath expression.

The output of this action is a list of service ids and the results of action `check-sync`.

Use the option `suppress-positive-result` to suppress results with empty diffs.

</details>

## Dry-run Drift Detection

> Dry-run drift detection compares the changeset between a commit and a dry-run to determine if any changes have been made between when a user does a dry-run and a commit. This is to prevent the user from accidentally committing changes that were not intended. A checksum of the changeset is saved when a dry-run is performed, and during commit a new checksum is calculated from the new changeset and compared to the checksum that was saved during the commit. Both checksums are calculated after the validation phase before the prepare phase. If you never ran a dry-run in the transaction, no comparison is performed. The feature applies to CLI, JSON-RPC, and Web UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dry-run drift detection compares the changeset from a dry-run with the changeset at commit time to determine whether anything has changed in between. This helps prevent users from accidentally committing unintended changes. When a dry-run is performed, a checksum of the changeset is saved. During commit, a new checksum is calculated from the current changeset and compared with the saved checksum. Both checksums are calculated after the validation phase and before the prepare phase. If no dry-run has been performed in the transaction, no comparison is made. This feature applies to the CLI, JSON-RPC, and Web UI.
```

> This is configurable by the dry-run-drift-detection container in tailf-ncs-aaa.yang, with its two leafs "enabled" and "mode". "mode" can be either "warn" or "strict". In "warn" mode, the user will receive a validation warning if the changesets differ between dry-run and commit. The user can then choose whether or not to continue despite the warning. This is handled in the same way as other validation warnings. In "strict" mode, an error is returned instead and the transaction is aborted, and a new dry-run is required to be able to commit. "enabled" is default "false" in tailf-ncs-aaa.yang, with default mode being "warn". However, enabled is set to "true" in ncs_defaults.xmk.in, so for new deployments of NSO the setting will be enabled by default. This setting can be configured globally by setting the dry-run-drift-detection leafs in tailf-ncs-aaa.yang, for example in the CLI:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is configurable by the dry-run-drift-detection container in tailf-ncs-aaa.yang, with its two leafs "enabled" and "mode". "mode" can be either "warn" or "strict". In "warn" mode, the user will receive a validation warning if the changesets differ between dry-run and commit. The user can then choose whether to continue despite the warning. This is handled in the same way as other validation warnings. In "strict" mode, an error is returned instead and the transaction is aborted, and a new dry-run is required to be able to commit. "enabled" is default "false" in tailf-ncs-aaa.yang, with default mode being "warn". However, enabled is set to "true" in ncs_defaults.xml.in, so for new deployments of NSO the setting will be enabled by default. This setting can be configured globally by setting the dry-run-drift-detection leafs in tailf-ncs-aaa.yang, for example in the CLI:
```

> This is configurable by the dry-run-drift-detection container in tailf-ncs-aaa.yang, with its two leafs "enabled" and "mode". "mode" can be either "warn" or "strict". In "warn" mode, the user will receive a validation warning if the changesets differ between dry-run and commit. The user can then choose whether or not to continue despite the warning. This is handled in the same way as other validation warnings. In "strict" mode, an error is returned instead and the transaction is aborted, and a new dry-run is required to be able to commit. "enabled" is default "false" in tailf-ncs-aaa.yang, with default mode being "warn". However, enabled is set to "true" in ncs_defaults.xmk.in, so for new deployments of NSO the setting will be enabled by default. This setting can be configured globally by setting the dry-run-drift-detection leafs in tailf-ncs-aaa.yang, for example in the CLI:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This behavior is configured through the `dry-run-drift-detection` container in `tailf-ncs-aaa.yang`, which has two leaves: `enabled` and `mode`. The `mode` leaf can be set to `warn` or `strict`. In `warn` mode, the user receives a validation warning if the changeset differs between dry-run and commit, and can choose whether to continue. This is handled the same way as other validation warnings. In `strict` mode, an error is returned instead, the transaction is aborted, and a new dry-run is required before the commit can proceed. In `tailf-ncs-aaa.yang`, `enabled` defaults to `false` and `mode` defaults to `warn`. However, `enabled` is set to `true` in `ncs_defaults.xmk.in`, so the feature is enabled by default for new NSO deployments. The setting can be configured globally by setting the `dry-run-drift-detection` leaves in `tailf-ncs-aaa.yang`, for example in the CLI:
```

```cli
admin@ncs% set session dry-run-drift-detection enabled
admin@ncs% set session dry-run-drift-detection disabled
admin@ncs% set session dry-run-drift-detection mode strict
admin@ncs% set session dry-run-drift-detection mode warn
```

It can also be set per user, for example:

```cli
admin@ncs% set user admin session dry-run-drift-detection enabled
admin@ncs% set user admin session dry-run-drift-detection disabled
admin@ncs% set user admin session dry-run-drift-detection mode strict
admin@ncs% set user admin session dry-run-drift-detection mode warn
```

In the CLI, it is also possible to set this per session in operational mode:

```cli
admin@ncs> dry-run-drift-detection true
admin@ncs> dry-run-drift-detection false
admin@ncs> dry-run-drift-detection mode warn
admin@ncs> dry-run-drift-detection mode strict
```

> This does not require a commit and will only last for this CLI session, i.e. the changes are not persistent. This works in the same way as the existing commit-prompt setting.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This does not require a commit and will only last for this CLI session, meaning the changes are not persistent. This works in the same way as the existing commit-prompt setting.
```
